---
title: Scientific Antirealism
author: Jeremy D. Jones
written: Pre-2007
status: Original – Preserved without edits or corrections
course: Undergraduate Capstone
school: The University of Oklahoma
slug: scientific-antirealism
draft: false
---
<link rel="stylesheet" href="/assets/style.css">
<header class="paper-header">
  <h1>{{ page.title }}</h1>
  <p>
    <span class="author">{{ page.author }}</span><br/>
    <span class="course">{{ page.course }}</span><br/>
    <span class="date">{{ page.date | date: "%−d %B %Y" }}</span>
  </p>
</header>

Jeremy Jones
Capstone
15 April 2007

# Scientific Antirealism

## Introduction
Science is successful.  Nearly every advance and comfort of the modern world speaks for this fact.  Scientific Realists can easily explain the success of science in terms of truth.  However, it is much more difficult for the Scientific Antirealist to explain scientific success.  Some Antirealists have argued that science is not successful.  Such arguments are a major reason why Scientific Antirealism is generally not given proper attention.  If philosophers are to take Antirealism seriously – at all – Antirealists must argue that science is successful.  I intend to illustrate how Antirealism can account for scientific success.
Before continuing it would be useful to define two terms that I will be using throughout this essay.  First, empirical adequacy is the idea that the correct predictions we make about future events can only be considered observationally consistent – not true per se.  For example, we have observed many instances of what we call causality.  We are justified in making predictions about future events of causality because, thus far, such predictions have maintained their observational consistency: we have been able to correctly predict instances of causality in virtue of our past experiences of causality.  Therefore, we consider the laws of causality to be empirical adequate.  It is important to note that empirical adequacy is intended to occupy the ontological space of truth; in lieu of truth.  The most fundamental difference between truth and empirical adequacy is that truth may entail empirical adequacy – because all true theories would appear observationally consistent – but empirical adequacy does not entail truth.  Empirically adequate theories could be false.  Second, an Inference to the Best Explanation is a “method of reasoning employed in the sciences in which scientists elect [a] hypothesis which would, if true, best explain the relevant evidence. Recent work in the philosophy of science has shown that those hypotheses that qualify as ‘best’ typically provide simple, coherent, and causally adequate explanations of the evidence or phenomena in question.”   
The first question I must address in this essay is whether or not Scientific Antirealists can accept the Realist definition of truth.  I contend that the Realist definition of truth prematurely entails Scientific Realism.  Thus, Antirealists must appeal to empirical adequacy to ground scientific success.  Given truth’s apparent entailment of empirical adequacy it seems that truth is the best explanation of empirical adequacy.  If so, any Antirealist attempt to ground scientific success in empirical adequacy is – at bottom – grounding scientific success in Realist truth.  Therefore, I must show that empirical adequacy is not grounded in Realist truth.  I intend to meet this challenge by illustrating that the Realist definition of truth implicitly, prematurely, and incorrectly claims that we have some pragmatic reason to believe there is a truth which governs the appearance of empirical adequacy.  In fact, we have no reason to suppose that truth entails empirical adequacy because both Realist truth and empirical adequacy are separately (and equally) grounded in an inference to the best explanation.   
Alan Musgrave argues that the Antirealist attempt to ground scientific success in empirical adequacy is inferior to the Realist appeal to truth for two reasons.   1) The Antirealist cannot appeal to IBE at all.  2) Without IBE, the concept of empirical adequacy – which Antirealists need – is self refuting.  Musgrave is wrong for two reasons.  1) He presupposes the Realist definition of truth in order to show that Antirealists cannot appeal to IBE.  2) Given IBE, empirical adequacy is no more self refuting than the Realist’s definition of truth.  Therefore, if we appeal to IBE to ground empirical adequacy we will find that (Scientific) Realist and Antirealists theories are on equal footing.  Philosophers will need to find another way to prove that one theory is better than the other.  
I begin by arguing that the Realist definition of truth does not necessarily entail empirical adequacy.  Truth appears to entail empirical adequacy because of its implicit claim that there is some pragmatic reason to believe that something governs the appearance of empirical adequacy.  When we attempt to locate the reason why Scientific Realists believe something governs empirical adequacy we find that they merely appeal to IBE to establish truth’s governance of empirical adequacy.  However, these points only illustrate that empirical adequacy is not necessarily governed by truth; the Realist appeal to IBE may be correct.
My next step is to argue that Scientific Realists must make two separate appeals to IBE.  The first is to ground empirical adequacy in truth and the second is to ground truth in the nature of reality.  Conversely, Scientific Antirealists must make two appeals to IBE; namely, to ground scientific success in empirical adequacy and to directly ground empirical adequacy in the nature of reality.  I will illustrate these steps by giving Alan Musgrave’s argument for Scientific Realism and Musgrave’s rendition of Putnam’s ‘Miracle Argument’ for Scientific Realism.  I argue that Musgrave makes a valid argument against the compatibility of IBE and Scientific Antirealism.  However, Musgrave’s argument is not sound because some of his argumentative qualifiers force his argument to be an attack against a ‘straw man.’  Putnam's challenge (via Musgrave) is met when we discover that Scientific Antirealism can utilize IBE to ground empirical adequacy in the same way that Scientific Realists use IBE to ground truth.   
  Furthermore, since both the Realist definition of truth and empirical adequacy depend upon IBE to ground scientific success we must consider Scientific Realism and Scientific Antirealism to be equally explanatory.  They are simply two routes to the same goal.  One is taken by Realists, the other by Antirealists.  Therefore, the Realism/Antirealism debate will have to be solved in another way.    
## Is Science Successful?
Science is successful, in the sense that in very determined and directed ways it makes verifiable progress; GPS, cigarette lighters, and plastics all speak for this fact.  Scientific Realists appeal to scientific theories’ respective truthfulness to ground and explain scientific success and progress.  When a Scientific Antirealist attempts to explain scientific success they will almost always aspire to the Realist definition of truth.  Antirealists wish to utilize the Realist definition of truth because it is a seductive view of truth.   The attractiveness of this definition can be explained if we examine the commonsense definition of truth.
  When you ask a person on the street what she believes truth to be she will – almost – invariably describe a Realist definition of truth.  She believes that there is some absolute truth out there which is at least partially available to us at every moment.  If you ask the same person about the objective of science and how scientists intend to achieve that objective; she will probably give another Realist answer.  The objective of science is to reach that truth – however futile the effort may be – and scientists can edge closer to that goal by discrediting inferior theories while supplying superior ones.  It seems commonsensical to suppose that the Realist definition of truth is the correct definition; especially when we consider that the majority of people would agree to the definition’s commonsensical nature.  Yet, identifying the correct model with the most popular model is rarely a good way to achieve progression.  To anyone who would press me on this point I will simply concede and then ask if he believes that voting for ‘American Idol’ is more important than voting for a Presidential candidate.   
  It’s an unfair advantage that Realists have the benefit of utilizing Truth when arguing against Antirealists.  Our desire to aspire to Truth makes Realist’s demands seem less loaded then they actually are.  However, Truth prematurely entails Scientific Realism.  Thereby making the Antirealist’s desire to agree that science is successful – while utilizing Truth – impossible.  Realists would argue that this is the perfect reason to accept Scientific Realism.  However, I contend that Truth is no better a concept than the Antirealist alternative; empirical adequacy.   
## How does Truth entail Scientific Realism? 
When some philosopher says that she believes science to be successful she is typically making an empirical claim.  She has observed instances of success, even if she cannot observe exactly how those instances are successful.  For example, she can use chemistry to synthesize physostigmine in a lab environment but she cannot directly observe the subatomic particles joining and separating from the basic elements she uses to create the substance.  However, she can observe the burning point of her new material and its usefulness in its respective applications.  She then may compare that information to the representative information of natural physostigmine.  She has followed the steps of a working chemist.  However, a similar burning point and similar uses do not necessarily prove the substance to be synthesized physostigmine.  It is still very possible that the synthesized substance supervenes upon natural physostigmine.  However, if we presuppose Truth then – very reasonably – it seems most parsimonious to say that we have actually synthesized natural physostigmine.  Yet, this merely shows that Truth could possibly entail Scientific Realism; it does not prove it.  
  When a working chemist attempts to synthesize a natural substance they have implied their belief in the theory of sub-atomic particles.  This theory is concerned with unobservable entities – protons, neutrons, and electrons –which are necessarily mind-independent.  Mind-independence is the hallmark of Scientific Realism, and the belief in such entities is necessarily excluded from Scientific Antirealists' available options.  While the Scientific Antirealist could go through the motions of a working chemist (I’m sure that some do) the nature of their work necessarily commits them to ideas which are contrary to Scientific Antirealism.  In this instance Scientific Realism is limited to the individual’s “heart-of-hearts.”   Therefore, an implied belief in the theory of sub-atomic particles is sufficient to illustrate the working chemists’ inclination toward Scientific Realism.  Such an inclination has consequences upon the definition of truth available to the working chemist.  One’s beliefs about the existence of mind-independent entities betray one’s position on the Scientific Realism/Antirealism see-saw.  If you believe in the existence of mind-independent entities you are a Scientific Realist.  If not, you may be a Scientific Antirealist.   
  Finally, if you are a working chemist you must accept the existence of mind-independent entities (i.e. atoms, sub-atomic particles, etc) in order to guide your scientific method.  If you accept the idea of mind-independent entities then you must believe that, while synthesizing substances, you are actually altering the arrangement of the mind-independent sub-atomic particles.  If you believe you are altering the arrangement of such particles then you must believe that those particles exist in a manner identical with how you represent them to exist.  If you believe those particles exist in the same manner as your representation of them then you must believe that your representation contains some measure of Truth.  If you believe that you can possess a portion of Truth then you must accept the idea that an ultimate Truth exists.  When all of these conditionals are met they add up to Scientific Realism.  However, this kind of philosophical argument is known as a Hypothetical Syllogism.  Such arguments have the benefit of being valid, even if they are not sound.  Therefore, I must show that this argument is sound.
  In order to show Truth’s entailment of Scientific Realism we should turn the above question around and ask “what would happen if a working chemist did not presuppose Truth?”  First, the possibility of the synthesized substances’ supervenience upon natural physostigmine becomes more than a remote possibility: it becomes an idea that we cannot – reasonably – disprove.  Our basis for postulating the existence of sub-atomic particles erodes.  The steps of a working chemist become less clearly defined because we have no sub-atomic theory on which to base the rules of chemistry.  Finally, any ‘success’ becomes both circumstantial and coincidental.  Simply put, any working scientist must accept Truth in order to have anything on which to base their scientific method and to determine if they are successful scientists.  This necessary belief in Truth is indicative of Scientific Realism.  This entailment demonstrably exists for working chemists but can be extended to every working scientist.  
  Even if scientists must necessarily believe in Truth to ground their scientific endeavors they have not shown Truth to be demonstrably correct.  They have merely shown that scientists must accept Truth for pragmatic reasons.  In other words, a belief in Truth is necessary to move toward scientific success.  Therefore, Scientific Realists need the pragmatic claim to be coupled with a belief in Truth.  However, they have not shown that Truth is necessary for scientific success to exist.  What they have shown is that the kind of pragmatic verification the chemist uses is necessary to consider science successful.  Though, without prematurely accepting Truth it can never be sufficient.  
  The empirical data of synthesized and natural physostigmine must be combined with IBE in order to be determined successful.  Without such an inference the idea that the synthesized substance merely supervenes upon natural physostigmine cannot be ruled out because supervenience cannot be disproven by empirical data unless we test every possible condition; which is impossible.   
  In essence, the chemist utilizes a pragmatic method of verification – empirical data combined with IBE – to suppose a metaphysical theory of subatomic particles; which allows her to manufacture rules and guides which will enable her and others to determine if she is successful.  The chemist needs those rules and guides if she is to perform chemistry but their existential status – whether or not they are True and mind independent – is unrelated to the assessment of her scientific success.  However, those rules and guides being true may be the best explanation of scientific success.  All this shows is that Scientific Realists cannot ground the success of science exclusively in Truth; they must appeal to IBE.  In the next section I will argue that Truth is neither sufficient nor necessary for scientific success to exist.  
## Copernican Astronomy vs. Ptolemaic Astronomy
Most modern individuals are convinced that Copernican Astronomy is the True astronomy.  However, Ptolemaic Astronomy successfully accounts for all the same phenomena.  The reason we choose to believe Copernican Astronomy is because it is a far simpler theory which accounts for all the same phenomena.  Alan Musgrave[^musgrave] gives a far more eloquent explanation of the differences of Copernican and Ptolemaic Astronomies than I could ever hope to give.  Therefore, instead of attempting my own explanation I will simply quote his.  
“The periodic retrograde motions of the superior planets are explained in Copernican astronomy by the fact that the earth overtakes those planets as it makes its annual journey around the sun. In Ptolemaic astronomy the earth is stationary at the centre of the universe, and makes no annual journey around the sun. Yet Ptolemaic astronomy also correctly yields the periodic retrograde motions of the superior planets. How? In Ptolemaic astronomy retrograde motions are explained by assigning each planet an epicycle-deferent system as it rotates around the stationary earth.”   

Antirealists have often argued that the success of Ptolemaic Astronomy proves that Copernican Astronomy is no more evidently True than Ptolemaic Astronomy.  Furthermore, since the two theories are evidentially equivalent yet incompatible, neither is True or – perhaps more strongly – that there is no Truth. Musgrave argues that the success of Ptolemaic Astronomy can be explained in terms of the correspondence of its annual epicyclical motions to the annual motion of the earth in Copernican Astronomy.  Therefore, Ptolemaic Astronomy’s similarity to the True Copernican Astronomy is responsible for its success.  
  This position seems a bit naïve.  If we take the concept of Truth seriously - as Musgrave would – then the success of Ptolemaic Astronomy is not dependent upon it’s relation to Copernican Astronomy; but rather, it’s relation to the nature of reality.  While, Musgrave may want to say that Copernican Astronomy is exactly representative of the nature of reality; it is entirely possible there are forces of which we are currently unaware that are responsible for Copernican Astronomy’s ability to successfully predict the major planetary motions.  In other words, he postulates a dependence of Ptolemaic Astronomy upon Copernican Astronomy which is actually a dependence of Ptolemaic Astronomy upon the nature of reality.  It is the same with Copernican Astronomy.  The only relation between the two theories is that they are similar in respect to their successful annual predictions of apparent retrograde motions.  Only their pragmatic verifications are similar and pragmatic verifications – as we have seen – are insufficient to prove Truth.  
  Realists could argue that each theory contains some measure of Truth, in virtue of which each successfully predicts the planetary motions, but that the parsimony of Copernican astronomy makes it the better theory.  Therefore, Copernican Astronomy is actually more True than Ptolemaic.  The supposition, that a more parsimonious theory is the better theory, is a pragmatic supposition.  If we are to believe that the parsimony of the Copernican theory makes it the True theory, then we are using a pragmatic supposition to postulate a metaphysical theory.  Truth needs a pragmatic element to ground itself in reality.  Yet, these pragmatic claims are not necessarily true.  They seem to be true, but this “seem” is merely a cultural phenomena which has its roots in the commonsense definition of truth that all people use daily.  However, the Realist could prove me wrong if he could show that Truth is grounded in the nature of reality.   Yet, how can we ground Truth in reality, if we do not know the full nature of reality?  Therefore, we must ask “do we understand the nature of reality?”
  If Quantum physics are true, they undermine the truthfulness of Newtonian physics under certain circumstances (i.e. when measuring the speed of light while traveling at the speed of light).  Time is an important feature of our reality; yet, we cannot perform scientific experiments on time because we have no way to isolate it to constructing a control.  We certainly cannot claim to understand time if we cannot perform scientific experiments on it and those scientific experiments are the very way we try to understand reality.  The Realism/Antirealism debate this essay attempts to contribute to is proof that there is still debate over how much of a role the human mind plays in constructing what we observe.  A necessary conclusion to this question must be reached before we can call reality “understood.”  These considerations – along with innumerable others – are a telling manifestation of our ignorance of the nature of reality.  And I doubt that Realists (and Antirealists) can ground Truth in something that humans do not understand.  The only way that they can ground truth is with pragmatic reasoning.   
  As with the example of chemistry above, Realists have merely taken a pragmatic method of verification – successful prediction of planetary motions – and combined it with an appeal to IBE to name the metaphysical theory of Copernican Astronomy the True theory.  Yet, this is only an appeal to pragmatic verification to ground Truth; it does not prove anything.  Their concept of Truth is without solid footing – turtles all the way down.  Without a solid grounding for the concept of Truth we cannot claim to observe small measures of Truth when science is successful.  At most we can claim that we have observed empirical adequacy.  It is possible that this empirical adequacy is the result of an ultimate Truth.  However, we have no reason to suppose as much because the concept of Truth is actually an ‘Inference to the Best Explanation’ of the nature of reality.  Yet, as the above examples show we do not have all the appropriate data to judge if something is or is not the best explanation.  Therefore, the Realist cannot appeal to IBE to ground Truth beyond the ability of Antirealists to use IBE to ground empirical adequacy.  The Realist needs IBE to explain Truth and they need IBE to explain scientific success.  All of this merely reinforces my claim that if we take the concept of Truth seriously we are committed to Scientific Realism. However, Realists are aware of this; thus they acknowledge that their commitment to Scientific Realism and Truth are appeals to IBE.  To ground this they, again, appeal to IBE by saying that if we do not accept Scientific Realism and Truth that the success of science becomes miraculous.   
## Musgrave’s Argument for Scientific Realism
This Realist reply is called the ‘Miracle Argument”[^miracle-arg] and it is a case of IBE.  Basically, they mean to say that Scientific Realism is accurate because it is the best explanation of the pragmatic usefulness of science.   However, we have seen that any grounding of the success of science must appeal to IBE.  So the question becomes “which is the better explanation; the Realist’s appeal to IBE or the Antirealist’s?” Alan Musgrave offers the following challenge to answer this question.  He denies that Antirealists can appeal to IBE.   If they cannot appeal to IBE then they must ground empirical adequacy some other way.  Next, he attempts to show that any Antirealist attempts to ground empirical adequacy without IBE are circular.  Therefore, he denies that anything except Scientific Realism can be the best explanation of the success of science.
Musgrave argues for Scientific Realism on the ground that no Antirealist theory of truth can account for the success of our scientific theories because IBE is not available to the Antirealist.  We are forced to ground scientific success in Truth because the competing Antirealist theory – empirical adequacy – is circular without IBE.  However, if Antirealists attempt to appeal to Truth their theories are either incoherent or a form of masked Realism.  
They lynchpin of Musgrave’s argument is to remove the grounding of Bas Van Frassen’s theory of empirical adequacy.  Basically, empirical adequacy is the idea that when an individual believes X is true, they actually believe that X is empirically adequate.  In essence, Van Frassen attempts to replace the concept of Truth with the concept of empirical adequacy.  Musgrave’s argues that the Antirealist cannot appeal to IBE to explain empirical adequacy so he must appeal to something else to explain it.   However, when we consider Van Frassen’s attempt to explain empirical adequacy we actually find that it is circular.  If his explanation is circular it is far better to explain empirical adequacy in terms of Truth.  Since, Scientific Realism can easily account for empirical adequacy in terms of Truth, it is a better explanation of the nature of reality than Antirealism.  He bases his argument upon the following thought experiment.   
“Suppose that H is the best explanation we have of some phenomena. Remember the Truth-scheme: It is true that H if and only if H. Given the Truth-scheme, to believe that H and to believe that H is true are the same. So what is it to accept that H is empirically adequate? It is not to accept H, for this is the same as accepting that H is true. Rather, it is to accept a meta-claim about H, namely the meta-claim ‘H is empirically adequate’ or equivalently ‘The observable phenomena are as if H were true’. Call this meta-claim H*. Now, and crucially, H* is no explanation at all of the phenomena. The hypothesis that it is raining explains why the streets are wet—but ‘The phenomena are as if it were raining’ does not. Ergo, H* is not the best explanation—H is, or so we assumed. (Actually, all we need assume here is that H is a better explanation than H*.) So given IBE, H* should not be accepted as true. That is, given IBE, H should not be accepted as empirically adequate.” 

Musgrave’s criticism of empirical adequacy is predicated upon his truth-scheme. He illustrates his awareness of this when he states that “[he] wonder[s] which part of this argument those who believe that there is a constructive empiricist version of IBE will reject. Not IBE—at least, they are pretending to accept it. Not, presumably, the Truth-scheme.”   
If Antirealists reject the “truth-scheme” (Truth)[^truth-scheme] Musgrave’s criticism falls apart.  Musgrave is a competent philosopher and he predicts just this line of thought.  Therefore, in the initial lines of his essay he attempts to limit the scope of his argument to those Antirealists who accept Truth.  Yet, his restricted scope is problematic.  
## A Digression into Philology
The main target of his criticism is Van Frassen’s Constructive Empiricism. Constructive empiricism bases the success of science upon empirical adequacy.  If Musgrave is arguing against Van Frassen he has unwittingly failed to observe the scope of his initial restriction.  Contrary to Musgrave’s thesis, Van Frassen is exactly one of those Antirealist philosophers who “…say that some science might be ‘true’, but go in for some fancy antirealist theory of truth.”   Van Frassen does believe there may be some Truth but he makes an argument similar to Berkeley’s when he argues that nothing in our observations entitles us to suppose we can reach Truth.  If our theories are representative of Truth then it is merely coincidental.  He says all of this in his initial description of constructive empiricism; “Science aims to give us theories which are empirically adequate and acceptance of a theory involves as belief only that it is empirically adequate.”   In fact, most of the nine times that Van Frassen mentions Truth he is either describing the Realist formulation or arguing against it on the grounds that it is a semantic concept; this is precisely something that Realists do not wish to accept.  
Thus far I have show that Musgrave is incorrectly ascribing a particular position to Van Frassen[^vanfrassen].  In light of Musgrave’s error coupled with the above description of the incompatibility of Truth and Scientific Antirealism we can believe that any Antirealist explanation of the success of science cannot involve Truth.  Therefore, we must conclude that Musgrave has built himself a ‘straw man.’  However, Musgrave’s oversight does not show that Antirealists can produce a rival theory to Truth.  Perhaps Musgrave’s oversight is not important because Van Frassen – in fact all Antirealists – need to appeal to the Truth in order to ground empirical adequacy.
## Return to Musgrave’s Argument for Scientific Realism
Thus far, Musgrave has argued against the compatibility of IBE and Scientific Antirealism because empirical adequacy cannot replace Truth as an epistemological category as Van Frassen desires.  We have seen that Musgrave needs Van Frassen to commit to the idea of Truth in order for his argument to hold water.  However, we have seen that Musgrave has misinterpreted Van Frassen’s theory; he is not committed to Truth.  Therefore, Musgrave’s argument against Van Frassen has fallen flat.  However, I do accept his idea that he has illustrated that empirical adequacy requires IBE to be grounded.   Given that Scientific Antirealists can appeal to IBE; we must determine which appeal to IBE is better.  In order to illustrate this we should look further into Musgrave’s challenge to Scientific Antirealism.
Musgrave argues that if Scientific Antirealists desire to appeal to IBE to ground the success of science in empirical adequacy then they fail because an appeal to IBE to ground empirical adequacy – itself – will show that Truth is the better explanation of empirical adequacy.  If Truth is a better explanation of empirical adequacy, then Truth must also be the better explanation of the success of science.  Hence, Scientific Realism is a better explanation for the success of science then Scientific Antirealism.  First, he explains the Realist grounding of empirical adequacy, which he renames “observational adequacy.”  
“Suppose [some] theory…asserts the existence of unobservable or theoretical entities. [This] theory will not be true unless these existence claims are true, unless the theoretical entities really exist, unless the theoretical terms really do refer to things. So part of the realist story is that T is observationally adequate because the unobservables it postulates really do exist. But this cannot be the whole realist story. Reference may be a necessary condition for success, but it cannot be a sufficient condition…The other part of the realist story is that what the theory says about the unobservables it postulates is true.” 

Second, he argues that if we replace Truth with empirical adequacy – as Van Frassen advances – we are creating a circular foundation for empirical adequacy. 
“Van Fraassen replaces truth by empirical adequacy as an aim for science. But it is obvious that we cannot satisfactorily explain the empirical adequacy of a theory in terms of its empirical adequacy:
T is empirically adequate.
      Therefore, T is empirically adequate.
This explanation is no good because it is blatantly circular.” 

Finally, he argues that since Truth is a better explanation of empirical adequacy, IBE forces us to accept Scientific Realism if we wish to accept empirical adequacy.  Therefore, philosophers cannot utilize empirical adequacy to support Antirealism.                 
## Against Musgrave
Musgrave is correct in arguing that empirically adequacy cannot be explained in terms of empirical adequacy without circularity.  However, Musgrave has challenged Scientific Antirealists to present grounding for empirical adequacy beyond pragmatic verification.  If he is to be consistent then he must provide grounding for Truth beyond pragmatic verification. Realists would typically attempt to explain Truth in terms of its relation to the nature of reality.   However, we cannot explain something in terms of the nature of reality if we do not fully understand the nature of reality.  Any such explanation is necessarily an appeal to IBE.  Therefore, both Scientific Realists and Antirealists must appeal to IBE to ground the success of science.  Musgrave attempted to show that Scientific Antirealists cannot appeal to IBE but did not succeed.  Therefore, given that both Scientific Realists and Antirealists can – and must – appeal to IBE in order to explain the success of science; which explanation is best becomes an issue that is concerned with something other than the success of science.
## Conclusion 
I have argued that Scientific Antirealists cannot accept the Realist definition of Truth because Truth contains an implicit pragmatic claim about the nature of reality.  Namely; that something must govern the apparency of empirical adequacy.  Scientific Realists and Scientific Antirealist use IBE to ground Truth and empirical adequacy, respectively.  Therefore, neither are better or worse than the competing theory.  Either they are both unjustified because pragmatic justification cannot warrant metaphysical reasoning or they are both justified for the same pragmatic reasons.  
  Musgrave's argument for Scientific Realism is a valid argument but it is not sound.  He gives himself a 'straw man' to attack because Van Frassen does not possess the view that Musgrave's needs to complete his argument.  However, Musgrave has raised a good question about Scientific Antirealism.  Namely, does Scientific Antirealism need Truth to explain empirical adequacy.   Given Truth’s possible entailment of empirical adequacy it seems that Truth is the best explanation of empirical adequacy.  However, empirical adequacy does not need an additional appeal to IBE to ground itself in Truth because one appeal to IBE is sufficient to ground empirical adequacy in the nature of reality – so far as Truth is grounded in reality.  
  In the course of this essay it seems that everyone is claiming that they possess the best explanation of our observances.  And that is what everyone is claiming.  I merely intend to show that everyone needs to appeal to IBE to ground our observances.  However, I question the ability of IBE to ground anything because I do not believe that a pragmatic reason can justify a metaphysical claim.  I intentionally leave open the question of which theory is the best theory because I believe that IBE does not provide a solid grounding for Scientific Realism or Antirealism.




## Footnotes

[^ibe-def]: "Inference to the Best Explanation." ISCID Encyclopedia of Science and Philosophy. 2005. International Society for Complexity, Information, and Design. 29 Apr. 2007 <http://www.iscid.org/encyclopedia/Inference_To_The_Best_Explanation>. ‘Inference to the Best Explanation’ will hereafter be referred to as IBE.
[^musgrave]: Musgrave, Alan. The Rutherford Journal - the New Zealand Journal for the History and Philosophy of Science and Technology. 2006. Dept. of Phil., University of Canterbury. 07 Apr. 2007. Also see Musgrave, Alan. "The ‘Miracle Argument’ for Scientific Realism." The Rutherford Journal 2 (2006). 8 Mar. 2007 <http://www.rutherfordjournal.org/article020108.html>.
[^miracle-arg]: The “Miracle Argument” label as used by Musgrave, op. cit.
[^truth-scheme]: Hereafter, I will refer the Realist definition of truth with the capitalized noun “Truth.” If you see the term “truth” without the capital ‘T’ I am attempting to differentiate it from “Truth.” The same goes for the terms “True” and “true”, “Truthfulness” and “truthfulness,” etc.
[^vanfrassen]: Van Frassen, Bas. The Scientific Image. Oxford: Clarendon P, 1980. 13.
[^analogy]: See above, Copernican vs. Ptolemaic Astronomy. 
