---
title: "Analytic Philosophy Final"
author: "Jeremy Jones"
course: "Analytic Philosophy"
date: "2006-05-08"
slug: "analytic-philosophy-final"
draft: false
---

# Final

## Question #1
  Frege outlined the difference between a name, a referent, and the sense of an object.  He believed that meaning must be identified with the sense because it could not be identified with the referent.  Russell was heavily influenced by Frege’s theory of description and built his own theory around it.  In Russell’s theory meaning is identified with the logical description of a referent.  Kripke[^kripke] presents his theory of description as an alternative to Russell’s theory.  In Kripke’s theory he uses the term ‘rigid designator.’  A rigid designator is the name of an object which is necessary to that object.  Kripke describes the notion of necessity in terms of possible worlds.  Therefore, a name is a rigid designator if it designates the same object in all possible worlds.  
## Question #2
  Quine’s notion of reductionism is aimed at the logical positivist’s idea that our individual words are representative of our sense experiences.  The positivists believe that if we take our sentences and break them down into their most base components we will have reduced our sentences to sense experience.  Quine takes this notion of reduction and attacks it on the ground that our statements “face the tribunal of sense experience not individually but only as a corporate body.”   

## Question #6
  W.V.O. Quine argues against the distinction between analytic and synthetic truths in his essay Two Dogmas of Empiricism[^quine].  Basically, he argues that analyticity is impossible because all current definitions of analyticity presuppose analyticity.  Since a definition which presupposes itself is circular it cannot be true.  He begins with his definition of an analytic truth.  "A statement is analytic if it is true by virtue of meanings and independent of fact.”  What does it mean for a statement to be true via its meaning?
  Quine outlines a very Fregean notion of reference.  The name of an object and its referent are conceptually different even though they refer to the same thing.  A name may, with the same words, refer to a different referent.  Therefore, meaning cannot be identified by the name of an object.  Also, meaning cannot be identified with the referent because a referent can take different names.  Hence, meaning cannot be identified with either naming or reference.  There is a common notion that meaning can be identified with naming only if the names of any given referent are members of the same synonymy class of terms.  I can substitute one name for another and retain meaning only if the names have the same entailments and omissions.  This leaves open the question of how to define synonymy.
  There are two types of statements that are analytic; logical truths and those statements which can be reinterpreted as logical truths.  The latter are considered translatable into the former if we can define what Rudolph Carnap calls; the state description.  The state description is the result of breaking down any statement into its logical parts then assigning the appropriate truth values.  Once we have a complete listing off all the possible truth values we have a complete description on which to base any translation.  Roughly, this means that any statement is true if and only if it is necessarily true.  But for Carnap’s state description to support analyticity it must give an account of why we can translate a sentence into logical components without presupposing the analytic notion of necessity.  Carnap’s theory identifies necessity with synonymy and presupposes a notion of synonymy which cannot fully account for analyticity because of its circularity.  
  Synonymy is grounded in definition.  A word is synonymous with another word if their definitions are equal.  Who decided which words are synonymous with others?  If we look at our collective common sense as the culprit we have presupposed synonymy.  So we need an authoritative declaration of synonymy to account for interchangeable definitions of words.  Such a declaration must come from the contingent use of a word by the majority of individuals in a defined period of time.  This declaration can be espoused as synonymy salva veritate.  Two words are interchangeable if replacing one with the other does not change the truth value of the statement.  Again, we can only identify meaning with definition if we have a notion of synonymy that is not presupposed in analyticity.  Not all words are interchangeable because most English words have several meanings.  We cannot substitute the tertiary meaning of a word for another word where the primary meaning is intended when the respective tertiary and primary meanings are different.  Even if we allow the tertiary meanings of words to constitute an alteration in the applicable synonymy classes to which the word belongs we cannot escape the presupposition of synonymy classes in analytic truths.  Conversely, analytic truths can only be true salve veritate.  However, this Latin term presents a bit of “hocus-pocus.”  Salve veritate presupposes a notion of necessity.  Necessity presupposes analyticity.  Therefore, if we are to define analyticity via salve veritate we have laid ourselves in a vicious circle.  
  Quine’s final argument is against the idea that the nature of language is responsible for the blurring of analyticity not the notion itself.  Quine argues that if we look at a perfect language the syntactic rules can tell us which statements are analytic but not what analytic means.  If we grant that an analytic statement is a syntactically true statement which is also semantically true we still cannot reach a definition of analyticity.  A semantic rule is true only in virtue of the “postulates” of a language.  In a perfect language any set of sentences can be “postulates.”  Therefore, "If this is true, no subclasses of the truths of [a perfect language] are intrinsically more a rule than any other.  So if "analytic" means "true by rule", then no truth of [a perfect language] is analytic to the exclusion of any other."  In order to tell the actual “postulates” from those that simply appear as “postulates” we must look at the facts of the world.  Therefore, statements which are considered analytic ultimately rely on evidence of fact.  Hence, there is no analytic/synthetic distinction.  
## Question #9
D. M. Armstrong presents his philosophy of mind in his essay The Nature of Mind.  He argues that the traditional behaviorist identification of mental states and outward behavior is fundamentally crude.  The behaviorist account of mind denies that it is possible to have a mental state without any corollary outward behavior.  However, the behaviorist account cannot be correct because it is possible to have a mental state without exhibiting outward behavior.  Therefore, Armstrong refines the behaviorist identity of mind and behavior by calling a mental state a disposition to behave in a certain way.  If the behaviorist identifies mental states with the disposition to act a certain way then they can account for an individual choosing not to act in the way disposed.  
Ultimately, Armstrong rejects the behaviorist concept of the mental because it is unnatural.  “If somebody speaks and acts in certain ways it is natural to speak of this speech and action as the expression of his thought.  It is not at all natural to speak of his speech and action as identical with his thought” (Armstrong 240).   He remains sympathetic to behaviorism because he believes that action is “logically tied to behavior.”  A mental state is a state of an organism which is apt to bring about a certain range of behavior.  The mind is “the inner cause of certain behavior.  Therefore, Armstrong’s materialist account of mind characterizes a mental state as “nothing but the cause of certain sorts of behavior” (Armstrong 240).  While this seems very similar to behaviorism there is one fundamental difference.  The behaviorist’s conceptualization of mental states, as exhibited action, denies mental states any causal powers.  Armstrong’s account of mental states allows them to retain their causal powers.  If a mental state retains its causal powers he is free to say, after identifying mental states with physical states, that the mental causes our range of appropriate action.  
Before Armstrong can identify the mental with the physical he must account for thoughts and experiences.  Thoughts and experiences are not in the public realm but instead fall into the realm of private consciousness.  He elucidates the objection with an example of “automatic” driving.  We have all been privy to a time when we “wake up” without having been asleep.  Sometimes, when driving for long distances we relax into a state of automation.  We use the road signs and the gears to arrive at a point in course of reaching a destination.  Suddenly, we awake to realize that we cannot remember the last few miles or minutes. There were processes acting within us which allowed us to use the car and continue to drive but we were not cognizant of what was happening.  Something was missing from our normal processes.  Armstrong suggests that what was missing was consciousness.  “Consciousness of our own mental state may be assimilated to perception of our own mental state, and that, like other perceptions, it may then be conceived of as an inner state or event giving a capacity for selective behavior, in this case selective behavior towards our own mental states” (Armstrong 243).
  Armstrong’s theory is a version of identity theory and despite his eloquent language he is identifying the mind with the brain.  It is a strictly physicalist view of the mind.  The most fundamental problem with identity theory is that in any organism which is capable of feeling any of our mental states must be capable of feeling all of them.  The “other” organism cannot reach our mental states in a manner different from how we reach them.  Therefore, it is necessary to define a physical mechanism, which manifests itself in the mental, which is common to all organisms.  There is a range of organisms on our planet which seems to feel some of the same states that we feel.  Identity theorists must either admit that they have all the same mental states (e.g. emotions like love, anger, and jealousy) and reach those states in the same way we do or they must deny that any organism besides a human can feel any of our mental states.  Furthermore, it seems likely that any alien species which has the ability to come to our planet and communicate with us possesses some of the mental states that we possess, like pain.  But for the aliens to feel pain like we do they must have all of our mental states.  While there could be some physical mechanism common to all life on this planet which accounts for mental states it seems very unlikely that an alien could posses that same mechanism.  If the identity theorist argues that the alien does possess that mechanism then he is making a claim about existence itself.  He is saying that all life exists because of a certain trigger which is represented by the physical mechanism responsible for our mental states.  However, any existential claim is likely to not be provable.  Therefore, the identity theorist claim is very ambitious and almost certainly false.  
## Question #10
In the philosophy of mind there are several common positions philosophers take with respect to the juxtaposition of the brain, the mind, and experience; dualism, behaviorism, identity theory, and functionalism.  I will focus on the latter two and explicate why Hilary Putnam believes functionalism is preferable to identity theory as a theory of mind.  
In the 1960’s functionalism was introduced by Hilary Putnam in his essay The Nature of Mental States.  He advances the hypothesis; mental states are functional states of the whole body.  The functional state of an organism is defined by the culmination of (1) the input causes of a state (sense data and reflection in the Lockean sense) (2) the output causes of a state (the causal powers of thoughts) and (3) the relation of one state to another (how one mental state may lead to another). The collection of all an organisms functional states is called its Functional Organization. For example, the many differing mental states of humans and the relation of each state to all the others would be our functional organization. 
Identity theory is a stronger form of materialism than functionalism because it is an extension of the classic form of reductionism which states; “for each psychological kind... there is a unique physical kind... that is nomologically coextensive with it”.   Identity theorists believe there is a “type-type” correlation between mental states and physical states of the brain.  Identity theorists believe the brain has a set of physical states.  All mental states are actually physical states because there is a one-to-one ratio of mental to physical.  Any being capable of obtaining a mental state must have the ability to obtain the specific corollary physical state.  Conversely, this physical state must not be a possible state of any being incapable of obtaining the corollary mental state. 
Putnam states this “type-type” reduction of mental states to physicals states is problematic because many structurally different organisms seem to obtain the same mental states.  Putnam argues that it seems much more plausible to say that pain is realized by the functional organization of an organism because organisms with wildly different structures can obtain the same functional states.  Furthermore, to prove his theory the identity theorist must produce species-independent neurophysiological laws to account for multiple types of organisms experiencing the same states. But it seems more plausible to discover species-independent psychological laws, which bear no relation to physical structure, rather than species-independent neurophysiological laws, which depend wholly on physical structure.  This means that species bearing different physical structures may still posses a similar functional organization, such that, many species can realize the same functional state. 
  Functionalism presents a valid alternative to identity theory but is not without its own flaws.  Functionalism argues for the multiple realizablity of mental states.  If a mental state is realizable by many different mechanisms then we must identify a mental state as a disjunctive property.  An example will make this clearer.  Pain is a mental state in humans.  It seems very likely that any organism is capable of feeling pain.  But given that organisms are constructed in differing manners, in order to say that all organism are capable of feeling pain we must say that pain is realizable by several states; X, Y, and Z.  Pain would then be identified as the property of being in; X or Y or Z.  But where do we draw the line.  If a property is disjunctive in nature we can associate any number of differing mental states with the functional state pain.  In order to distinguish the correct “pain-feeling” functional states from the “non-pain-feeling” functional states we must know which states are “pain-feeling” from those which are not.  But this begs the question we have already posed ourselves.  Therefore, we cannot define a pain as a disjunctive property.  Under functionalism, without such a definition we are left to say either only humans can feel pain or pain is realizable by any mental state.  The best alternative is to reject functionalism.   
## Works Cited
Armstrong, D.M.  The Nature of Mind.  Analytic Philosophy: An Anthology: Blackwell P, 2001.  237-244.

Putnam, Hilary.  The Nature of Mental States.  Analytic Philosophy: An Anthology: Blackwell P, 2001.  245-251.

Quine, W.V.  Two Dogmas of Empiricism. Analytic Philosophy: An Anthology: Blackwell P, 2001.  450-462.  

## Footnotes

- [^kripke]: Kripke, Saul. Naming and Necessity. Harvard University Press, 1980.
- [^quine]: Quine, W.V.O. “Two Dogmas of Empiricism.” In Analytic Philosophy: An Anthology. Blackwell P, 2001. 450–462.