---
title: "Recollection and Plato’s Moral Theory Revisited"
author: "Jeremy Jones"
course: "Plato"
date: "2006-03-19"
slug: "recollection-and-platos-moral-theory-revisited"
draft: false
---
<header class="paper-header">
  <h1>{{ page.title }}</h1>
  <p>
    <span class="author">{{ page.author }}</span><br/>
    <span class="course">{{ page.course }}</span><br/>
    <span class="date">{{ page.date | date: "%−d %B %Y" }}</span>
  </p>
</header>

In Recollection and Plato’s Moral Theory Terence Irwin argues for the incompatibility of the craft analogy and the Theory of Recollection in Socrates epistemology.  Irwin believes that the craft analogy is supported in the early Socratic Dialogues but that after the introduction of the Theory of Recollection the craft analogy is unsupported.  Since the Theory of Recollection is first given in Meno and Phaedo, Irwin believes that Plato realized the incompatibility of these two forms of epistemology and sought the Theory of Recollection as a replacement to the craft analogy.  Irwin argues that for the first time there is a separation between what Socrates thought and what Plato believed.  I do not intend to deny developmentalism in the dialogues, but I do not believe that Irwin can postulate it on the apparent differences between the Socratic dialogues and Meno and Phaedo.  Rather, I will show that the craft analogy and the Theory of Recollection are compatible given the distinction between knowledge and true belief presented in Meno by Socrates.  Furthermore, I will show that Socrates’ idea of “recollection” is synonymous with neither learning nor teaching because “recollection” is the justification of true belief that takes place after death.  All apparent references to recollection in this world are postulated before Socrates draws the distinction between true belief and knowledge and are merely an expedient to encourage philosophic dialogue.      

## Irwin’s Argument
Any craft will begin with a final goal.  Through a process of refinement that goal can be achieved by the craftsman who can then justify his achievement by appeal to his final product.  Irwin believes that Socrates views himself as a craftsman for three reasons.  First, in the Socratic dialogues he always claims the acquisition of knowledge as the final goal.  Obviously the acquisition of knowledge can be a final goal for Socrates because he identifies the acquisition of knowledge with virtue and identifies virtue with happiness.  Second, Socrates uses the elenchus as a process of refinement to achieve that goal.  The elenchus is a process of refinement because Socrates states that if we repeatedly use the elenchus to purge our false beliefs and replace them with true beliefs that “the method will [eventually] yield knowledge.”  Third, individuals may determine their beliefs to be knowledge when they can “’reason out the explanation’ (98a) for his beliefs, and justify them.”  Just as a craftsman may justify his methods by examining his final product.  Since Socrates begins with a final goal, a process to achieve it, and a method of justification, he must view the acquisition of moral knowledge as a craft aimed at the final “good.”[^1]   

But Irwin believes that Socrates does not treat the acquisition of moral knowledge as a craft in the Meno and Phaedo because of Plato’s use of the theory of recollection[^2].  Contrary to the Socratic dialogues, Plato introduces TOR in Meno to give an answer to the question of the priority of definitional knowledge presented by Meno’s Paradox.  The paradox can be presented like this:

1.  If you know what you're looking for, inquiry is unnecessary. 
2.  If you don't know what you're looking for, inquiry is impossible. 
3.  Therefore, inquiry is either unnecessary or impossible.[^3] 

The TOR answers this paradox by stating that within the individual there is innate knowledge which is forgotten at birth.[^4]   When we acquire “new” knowledge we are actually recollecting what we have previously forgotten.  Hence, we are not actually inquiring into something we do not know.  

Irwin believes that TOR is deceptively similar to the elenchus.  The elenchus begins with the interlocutor’s true and false beliefs about a topic.  Similarly, the process of recollection begins with an individual’s true or false beliefs about the knowledge he is attempting to gain (Meno 85c6-8).  In both TOR and the elenchus Socrates states that knowledge can be acquired after these beliefs are purged of falsity and further refined.    Thus far it appears that TOR has been a “demonstration-example of a Socratic elenchus, with a commentary to explain what Socrates is doing.”  But, Irwin asks the question; if the TOR is merely an elenchus “what…is the point of introducing [TOR] at all?”  Irwin believes that TOR is not a Socratic claim.  Rather, he claims TOR is an attempt by Plato to put his own ideas in the mouth of Socrates and that the competing theories similarity can account for the misrepresentation of Plato’s idea.  Irwin’s argument rests on the claim that Socrates treats the acquisition of moral knowledge as a craft in the Socratic Dialogues[^5] but Plato does not in Meno and Phaedo.  His argument can be formally outlines like this:

In the Socratic dialogues…
(1) Socrates never claims any moral knowledge.
(2) Socrates never offers to teach moral knowledge.
(3) Socrates pursues moral knowledge with the elenchus.  
(4) The elenchus is like a craft.[^6] 
(5) Socrates attempts to acquire moral knowledge in a craft-like manner.

Yet, in Meno and Phaedo…

(6) All learning and teaching is recollection.[^7]   
(7) Craft-like knowledge cannot be recollected.
(8) So, TOR and the craft analogy are incompatible.
(9) Socrates presents the TOR in Meno and Phaedo.  
(10) So, Plato must believe in TOR, not Socrates.[^8]   

Irwin predicts the easiest way to counter his argument is to deny premise (5); that Socrates treats the acquisition of moral knowledge as a craft in the Socratic dialogues.  Irwin supports this premise with Socratic eudaimonia; the idea that the final aim of moral knowledge is “happiness.”[^9]  Eudaimonia gives Socrates a goal for his craft and allows him to prescribe a systematic and rational procedure to achieve this goal; the elenchus. The craft like procurement of moral knowledge is compatible with Socratic eudaimonism because it does not affect the individual’s choice.  An individual may choose to use his skill or competence in a craft to produce a good or bad product.  “Craft-knowledge prescribes ways to achieve an end… [but does] not make sure that he will want to achieve that end.”  Hence, Irwin believes that Socrates is unwaveringly committed to the craft-analogy for the acquisition of moral knowledge in the Socratic dialogues.  

So, he turns his effort to show that in Meno and Phaedo Socrates may only treat moral knowledge as craft if he can give an account of the goal of moral knowledge which is compatible with TOR.  For Socrates, the goal of moral knowledge is virtue.  Yet, Irwin rejects the idea that goal of virtue can be known independent of knowledge of virtue.  He argues that Socrates never claims virtue qua moral knowledge in Meno and Phaedo because of these strict conditions presented by the craft analogy. “There will be no knowledge of the final good without knowledge of virtue.”  

Irwin attempts to show how Plato illustrates his deviation from the Socratic idea that the acquisition of moral knowledge is craft-like endeavor.  Contrary to the Socratic dialogues, Plato is not committed to the craft analogy in Meno and Phaedo because he believes that observable properties cannot become knowledge via recollection.  Furthermore, Plato believes recollection to be the only way to acquire knowledge.  If knowledge of observable properties is not possible then craft-like knowledge is not possible.  Any account of the final goal must be in terms of “observable” properties of the goal.  Since Plato has rejected the idea that any such account could be found “we [may] not treat [the acquisition of] moral knowledge as…directed toward some independently known final good.”  Thus, in Meno and Phaedo the acquisition of moral knowledge is not a craft.  

Irwin claims that it is obvious that Socrates is committed to the existence of craft knowledge in the Socratic dialogues.  Yet in Meno and Phaedo, Plato is committed to the idea that we cannot acquire moral knowledge via craft because craft knowledge does not exist.  Craft knowledge cannot exist because craft knowledge requires a goal which can be known independent of any knowledge of the craft.  Since, virtue is the goal of moral knowledge; Socrates must be able to describe virtue without any moral knowledge.  Given that TOR is the only way to acquire knowledge it seems implausible that Socrates could give an account of virtue without knowing how moral knowledge participates in virtue.  Irwin argues that Plato recognizes this tension and thus does not intend TOR as an ammendum to Socrates method of acquiring moral knowledge.  Rather, it appears in Meno and Phaedo as if Plato is presenting views about craft knowledge contrary to those he presented in the Socratic dialogues.  Therefore, Irwin concludes that Plato is the possessor of the views presented in Meno and Phaedo, not Socrates.  

## Reply
Irwin argues that Plato has replaced the ideas of Socrates with his own in Meno and Phaedo because craft-knowledge is incompatible with TOR.  First, Irwin believes that in order for the craft analogy to apply in Meno and Phaedo the goal of moral knowledge must be known independent of knowledge of virtue.  Since, Socrates cannot describe the virtues participation in the final “good” without having knowledge of virtue, the craft analogy cannot be accepted in Meno.  

I believe this view is due to Irwin’s misunderstanding of the craft analogy.  The craft analogy fits Meno and Phaedo because the elenchus is always aimed at true belief and true belief is sufficient for virtue.  If virtue is obtainable without actual moral knowledge then the eudaimonistic goal of virtue can be described without actual moral knowledge.  True beliefs become knowledge only when we can justify those beliefs.  Since all knowledge is recollection; recollection is justification.  Furthermore, Irwin identifies recollection with teaching and learning.  Yet, the Socrates of Meno and Phaedo would deny that teaching and learning are recollection.  

First, Socrates argues for the learn-ability of virtue.  Virtue is an activity of the soul.  An activity of the soul is beneficial when it is governed by wisdom (Meno 88d). All that is beneficial is virtue.  Therefore, if an activity of the soul is governed by wisdom then it is virtue.  All human activity depends on the soul.  Therefore, all human activity depends on wisdom.  But the nature of the soul is neither good nor bad, intrinsically.  So, “good” people are not “good” by nature.  Therefore, if people can become “good” then “goodness” must be learnable.  Virtue makes people “good.”  Therefore, virtue is learnable.  True belief is sufficient for virtue.  Hence, true belief is learnable.  Since virtue can be learned via true belief which is not yet knowledge, recollection cannot be identified with learning.  But where does Socrates argue for the distinction between true belief and knowledge?  

Socrates leaves it up to the individual to learn virtue on his own by distinguishing between knowledge and true belief.  “We must then at all costs turn out attention to ourselves and find someone who will in some way make us better…for it is ridiculous that we failed to see that it is not only under the guidance of knowledge that men succeed” (Meno 96d-e).  He argues that true belief is no less reliable than knowledge to deal with daily endeavors.  So, men must become “good” merely with true belief. The elenchus may establish true beliefs but may not teach knowledge.  So, true beliefs may be learned.  Hence, virtue can only be learned via true belief (Meno 97c).  Obviously, Socrates has identified true belief with virtue, but this does not exclude knowledge as an agent which can cause virtue.  Therefore, it is necessary to show that Socrates does not believe knowledge can be had in this life.    

Socrates states that true belief may “become” knowledge only after we have justified it.  Yet, immediately after making this statement he disqualifies himself from the possession of knowledge.  “Indeed, I too speak as one who does not have knowledge but is guessing” (Meno 98b).  Socrates believes the elenchus to be capable of instilling true beliefs in men.  But the body and its senses are a distraction to knowledge (Phaedo 65d).  If anyone seeks a goal they should seek separation from that which inhibits them from achieving their goal.  Knowledge can only be gained when the soul is separated from the body (Phaedo 65c).  Separation of the soul and body is death.  Knowledge is justified true belief.  So, philosophers should seek separation (i.e. death) in order to justify their true beliefs.    Hence, in Phaedo, Socrates is claiming that justification may only be gained in the afterlife (Phaedo 64a-69e).  Hence, actual moral knowledge (qua justified true belief) may only be gained after death.

The second reason Irwin denies the consistency of the Socratic dialogues and Meno and Phaedo is because Socrates apparently denies that craft knowledge is possible in the latter two dialogues.  Irwin is correct to state that craft knowledge is not possible for Socrates in Meno and Phaedo.  But this is not incompatible with the Socratic dialogues because Socrates is never aiming at actual moral knowledge.  The craft analogy applies to the acquisition of true belief, not knowledge, because actual moral knowledge (qua justified true belief) cannot be the goal of a craft pursued in this world.   

Socrates claims that true belief is knowledge when “tied down” with justification.  Then only a few lines later he states that he does not speak as one who possesses this bit of knowledge.  Rather, Socrates states that he believes it to be true.  Socrates concludes that it is true belief, not knowledge, which guides men in their correct actions.  Since all knowledge is recollection and recollection cannot be taught, knowledge cannot be taught.  But the elenchus is the method for acquiring true belief and the elenchus may be taught.  If true belief is adequate for virtue then the elenctic method is satisfactory for virtue.  

The acquisition of moral knowledge is Socrates final goal, but it cannot be achieved in this world.  Since, recollection is the method to this goal it appears that recollection cannot be had in this world.  Irwin presents this idea with a rhetorical question.  “Does [Socrates] think [TOR] will also be the method of moral teaching, or the only way for one man who has moral knowledge to pass it on to another?”  This illustrates Irwin’s confusion about TOR.  Socrates states explicitly that there is no such thing as teaching.  “As I said just now, Meno, you are a rascal.  You now ask me if I can teach you, when I say there is no teaching but recollection, in order to show me up at once as contradicting myself” (Meno 81e-82a).  Knowledge cannot be passed from one individual to another; all apparent “teaching” is recollection.  But this presents paradox since I have already stated that Socrates believes recollection is not possible in this world.  Yet, what we view as “teaching” seems entirely possible.  If “teaching” is recollection, then recollection must be possible in this world.  It is of special importance that Socrates does not claim that the slave-boy has fully recollected the nature of geometry after their discussion.  Socrates states that the boy could achieve knowledge “as accurate as anyone’s” if he were to continue to “recollect” these ideas.  At 85d-e Socrates appears to state that recollection is possible in this world.  Here, I believe Socrates is making an equivocation of true belief and knowledge when speaking to Meno because he has yet to identify the difference between true belief and knowledge.  Rather than explicating the difference between true belief and knowledge each time he and Meno encounter it, Socrates uses the catchall term “knowledge.”  Socrates’ use of the term “knowledge” here is simply a hurried attempt at simplicity.  Later, he will outline the difference between true belief and knowledge.       

Irwin’s third criticism compares the elenchus-as-craft to the craft of shoemaking.  “How could [Socrates] claim that someone who seems to acquire new beliefs about shoemaking really only has his true beliefs about shoes and leather elicited from him?”  Indubitably, by Irwin’s definition shoemaking is a craft.  The artisan begins with the idea of what he believes to be the “perfect” shoe.[^10]  Then he proceeds to craft the shoe using specific methods and techniques.  Through trial and error he improves his methods and techniques until he reaches his goal.  But I fail to understand Irwin’s intended criticism.  A shoemaker has true beliefs about what makes a good shoe.  Trail and error seem to be a good way to elicit those beliefs which Socrates would claim the artisan already possesses. 

So far Irwin has claimed that the craft analogy presented in the Socratic dialogues is not compatible with TOR presented in Meno and Phaedo because (1) the goal of moral knowledge cannot be known independent of knowledge of virtue and...(2) because Socrates apparently denies that craft knowledge is possible in the Meno and Phaedo and…(3) because the craft analogy cannot support an analogy between the elenchus and shoemaking.  In reply to (1) I have shown that virtue (the goal of moral knowledge) can be known independent of knowledge of virtue via true belief.  In reply to (2) I have shown that Socrates does not deny craft knowledge, but instead denies knowledge altogether in this world.  Rather than aiming at craft knowledge Socrates was always aiming at craft-true belief.  In reply to (3) I have merely stated that this is a weak objection and met it with a weak answer.  As far as Irwin can deny the analogy unsupported, I can affirm it unsupported.      

[^1]  Laches 185d-e;  Hippias Minor 275d-276b;  Charmidies 174e-175a;  Etuhydemus 291b-292d; and  Gorgias 460b.  
[^2]  Hereafter, referred to as TOR.
[^3]  Cohen, Marc. "Meno's Paradox." American Academy of Religion. 11 Dec. 2000. University of Washington. 16 Mar. 2006 <http://www.aarweb.org/syllabus/syllabi/c/cohen/phil320/menopar.htm>.
[^4]  I call it innate knowledge to avoid the argument about how it was placed within the individual.  It could be from previous learning or from a deity but Socrates presupposes this knowledge in the individual.  
[^5]  By Socratic dialogues Irwin means the following: Apology, Crito, Euthyphro, Charmides, Laches, Lysis, Euthydemus, and Hippias Minor.
[^6]  See argument above offered by Irwin that Socrates believes the elenchus to be a craft.  
[^7]  Irwin quotes Meno 81d4-5, 87b6-8, and 98a.
[^8]  When I say that Plato believes in TOR, I mean that to say that he is replacing the craft analogy with TOR.  
[^9]  Euthydemus 278e3, 282a1-7;  Charmidies 174b11-13, 175e5-176a1.
[^10] “Perfect” could mean many things.  Good for running, climbing, or pleasing to the eye, etc…  The point is that the artisan has an ideal.  Whether or not that ideal can be objectively considered “perfect” is irrelevant.  
