---
title: "Why Nativism Kicks the Crap Out of Locke’s Empiricism"
author: "Jeremy Jones"
course: "Empiricism"
date: "2006-09-29"
slug: "why-nativism-kicks-the-crap-out-of-lockes-empiricism"
draft: false
---

Jeremy Jones
Empiricism
29 September 2006

# Why Nativism Kicks the Crap Out of Locke’s Empiricism
Over the past 2000 years Plato’s Theory of Knowledge has elicited more philosophical debate than most controversial topics can aspire to entertain throughout their history.  The ongoing debate largely stems from Plato’s claim “all knowledge is but remembering.”   In his theory the individual has already lived many lives and has learned all possible knowledge.  However, childbirth is so traumatic we temporarily block out everything we previously knew so well.  The result is that when we believe we are learning something new we are truly only remembering what we have previously blocked.  To put it briefly, Plato believes that all knowledge is innate.
Today, the interlocutors who debate over the correctness of Plato’s theory can be crudely divided into two opposing camps, nativists[^nativism] and empiricists. Specific theories are as varied as the group that comprises this camp; nevertheless all members would agree that some knowledge is innate.  Conversely, empiricists deny any knowledge can be innate, and instead they claim that all knowledge is derived from experience.  Widely considered the first great empiricist, Locke argues aggressively against the theory of innate ideas.   He believes all knowledge is gained from experience and reflection upon experience.      
Locke’s empiricism did not deal with nativism as sufficiently as he intended.  Thus, I will argue that Locke’s failure to account for the idea of substance leads to his failure to utilize Ockham’s razor to shave away nativism.  After establishing nativism’s right to exist as an epistemological theory on par with empiricism, I will argue that principles such as non-contradiction must considered innate knowledge if we believe that we possess the faculty of memory.  Finally, I argue that since Locke cannot consistently endorse the idea that humans possess the faculty of memory and endorse that all knowledge is conscious, we must consider nativism a more complete explanatory epistemological position than empiricism  
Locke encapsulates his argument against universal consent with an invocation of Ockham’s razor which appears very reasonable.  Coming into this world with Locke’s tabula rasa does seem simpler than bringing the stocked cupboard of the nativist.  This feeling of simplicity is due to the fact that Locke’s empiricism seems less prone to unanswerable questions about our knowledge than the nativist’s theory of innate knowledge.  One question which poses a problem to the nativist is “where does our knowledge originate?”  Locke’s empiricism deals with this question easily by claiming all knowledge is derived from sensory experiences and reflection.  However, any theory of knowledge must account for all human knowledge.  Just as the nativist’s theory of knowledge falls short of a complete explanation due to the question above, Locke’s empiricism falls short due to the human idea of substance.  
Our behaviors and interactions with the world provoke an intense desire to say that we possess an idea of material substance.  Locke endorses this idea; yet he fails to account for the idea of substance in any meaningful manner.  He states that the idea of substance is noticed by the mind by repeatedly perceiving the same bundles of qualities[^cat-bundle] in particulars.   From this perception we reason that there must be some bond which holds together the qualities of those particulars we repeatedly view.   “The mind...takes notice…that a certain number of these simple ideas go constantly together; which being presumed to belong to one thing…are called, so united in one subject, by one name; which, by inadvertency, we are apt afterward to talk of and consider as one simple idea…because…not imagining how these simple ideas can subsist by themselves, we accustom ourselves to suppose some substratum wherein they do subsist, and from which they do result; which therefore we call substance.”   He goes on to call our idea of substance an idea of “[we] know not what.”  However, since we cannot view substance with our senses he cannot claim that substance is known to us empirically.  Therefore, the idea of substance is more an inference than an actual perception, and any claim to know substance “obscurely” is really a tell-tale sign of inconsistency.  
When a nativist is confronted with the idea of substance he could simply reply that “knowledge of substance is built into our constitution.”  While, it is true that the nativist is hard pressed to make an account of how this knowledge was built into our constitution; he has still accounted for our possession of this knowledge.  Conversely, Locke has accounted for how we acquire our knowledge but he lacks an explanation which covers all knowledge.  Both theories simply lack the explanatory power to be complete theories of knowledge.  Does this imply that nativism is no simpler an explanation for our knowledge?  Yes, but it also implies that nativism is no more complicated an explanation than empiricism.  When using parsimony as the standard for excellence neither theory is better than the other.  Therefore, if Locke’s empiricism cannot clearly account for substance, which he believes humans possess, then he cannot employ Ockham’s razor to shave off nativism.  
Without Ockham’s razor to shave away nativism, Locke’s argument is weakened severely.  Yet, it is still necessary to defend the nativist against Locke’s secondary argument: the nativist builds his theory of knowledge upon the sandy foundation of universal consent.      
According to Locke, the principle of non-contradiction has been presumed innate solely based upon the foundation of universal consent.  Of a principle whose justification is so commonly taken for granted Locke says “of all the others, I think… [the principle of non-contradiction has]…the most allowed title to innate.”   Despite the intuitions of his interlocutors he denies universal consent due to his belief “that all children and idiots, have not the least apprehension or thought of [the principle of non-contradiction]: and the want is enough to destroy that universal assent…”   Yet, perhaps it is necessary that the faculty of reason be developed before a child or idiot can recall the principle of non-contradiction.  Locke replies that all knowledge must be “set before the minds eye” because “to imprint anything on the mind, without the mind’s perceiving it seems to me hardly intelligible.”   Therefore, if all knowledge is conscious knowledge and not everyone consents to the principle of non-contradiction then there is no universal consent. 
Though, it is not clear that all knowledge is conscious.  If someone can use memory to recall past experiences which are not currently conscious then why are we unable to recall past knowledge which is currently unconscious?  Locke argues that “our… [memories are]…nothing, but actual perceptions in the mind” and that they “cease to be anything, when there is no perception of them…”   Yet, if our memories cease to be anything it is unclear how we have the faculty of memory at all?  Locke believes that “the mind has a power, in many cases, to revive perceptions, which it has once had…” but that this power only amounts to “…an ability in the mind… to revive them again; and as it were paint them anew on itself…”   Essentially, Locke believes the mind has an additional “faculty” which allows it to “…paint [memories] anew…”  
To what does this additional “faculty” of the mind really amount?  For Locke, the distinction between how the mind redraws our memories and how it does not recall them is of special importance.  If our mind recalls our memories the implication is that we have the memories stored somewhere.  Yet, if our mind redraws our memories there need not be any repository.  But if we grant to Locke that this “faculty” redraws our memories rather than recalling them, what have we actually granted Locke?  If I once experienced “a green couch on Arbor Street” and I wish to redraw that experience in my mind then certainly something must recall that the couch was green and that it was on Arbor Street.  Without the facts of the experience no “faculty” can redraw my previous experiences.  So the important question becomes “how does this additional ‘faculty’ redraw the facts surrounding my previous experience if the facts have ‘ceased to be anything?”  
Locke could mean that the experience is redrawn by some mechanistic process.  However, my computer uses a mechanistic process to recall images, but is also uses its physical storage of binary information.   Without that physical storage of binary information my computer cannot recall any image. If Locke is implying that memory is some mechanistic process then every new redraw-able experience in my mind would require some physical change of my constitution.  I doubt Locke means that memory is “a mechanistic process” because he explicitly states that when the memories are not “in front of my mind’s eye” they literally “cease to be anything.”   Hence, the facts surrounding my previous experience must be recalled somehow.  
If Locke means that the additional “faculty” of the mind has access to some storehouse of pertinent facts surrounding my experience then he has simply masked the faculty of memory as a sub-faculty.  Given that the facts surrounding my past experiences must be recalled we can only assume that we have a storage facility which houses the facts of memories when they are not conscious.  If we have a storage facility of unconscious memories which are accessible then it is possible to have knowledge which is not “set before the mind’s eye.”  If it is possible to have knowledge which is not “set before the mind’s eye” then it is possible to recall previously unconscious knowledge.  Finally, recalling unconscious knowledge allows nativism to exist without universal consent because anyone who fails to consent may not yet have recalled the requisite knowledge.   
Locke’s argument against nativism is not effective.  He does succeed in disproving universal consent but this only proves that there is no universal consent.  The necessary assumption to Locke’s argument was “all knowledge is set before the mind’s eye.”  But we have seen how memory allows unconscious knowledge to be both in the mind and be unconscious at the same time.  Therefore, if we adopt the position that we have memory we must believe that unconscious knowledge is possible.  Since Locke endorses the idea that we possess the faculty of memory, he cannot claim all knowledge to be conscious.  Since his argument against universal consent requires that all knowledge be conscious, his argument against nativism fails.    
His attempt to use Ockham’s razor to shave away the innate knowledge theory was equally ineffective.  Locke cannot empirically account for human knowledge of substance.  Yet, his entire argument is intended to show that he can account for all human knowledge.  Locke’s empiricism can account for where our knowledge originated but fails to account for all the knowledge we possess.  Conversely, nativism fails to clearly account for where our knowledge originated but it can account for the possession of all our knowledge.  Therefore, each theory is insufficient to be considered a complete theory of knowledge.  As yet, any claim to empiricism’s superiority to nativism is entirely misguided when using parsimony as the standard of excellence.  Due to Locke’s inability to account for the human idea of substance, and the nativist’s ability to account for substance, we can consider nativism on par with empiricism.  Furthermore, do to Locke’s lack of a proper explanation of how all knowledge can be conscious, and the nativist’s position that some knowledge is unconscious; I would strongly urge anyone to consider nativism a strong combatant for epistemological dominance over empiricism.   


## Footnotes

[^nativism]: The theory that there are innate ideas is called nativism.
[^cat-bundle]: For example, the bundle of qualities belonging to a cat includes fur, rough tongue, and a meowing sound.
